# ILSAstats Checks

This repository is not a function, but rather a collection of scripts dedicated to document "official" statistics to which [ILSAstats](https://github.com/dopatendo/ILSAstats) can compare to. In addition, it may be useful for any other person who wants to test their own functions with "official" statistics. For now, it has as reference the statistics taken from [IEA IDB Analyzer](https://www.iea.nl/data-tools/tools) (SPSS version), the tool developed by IEA to estimate statistics with its studies and some others. Within IEA studies (e.g., TIMSS, PIRLS, ICILS, ICCS), IDB Analyzer outputs are treated as the official reference for its estimates. We plan to include other tables from the official published reports over time.

## Studies used

-   PIRLS 2001

-   PIRLS 2016

-   TIMSS 2003

-   TIMSS 2015

-   TIMSS 2023

-   ICILS 2018

-   ICCS 2009

Each of these studies have different particularities related to the calculation of imputation and sampling variance (i.e., standard error). These particularities are summarized in this table:

| Study | Year | nrwgt | jk2type | shrtcut |
|-------|------|-------|---------|---------|
| ICCS  | 2009 | 75    | HALF    | N       |
| ICILS | 2018 | 75    | HALF    | N       |
| PIRLS | 2001 | 75    | HALF    | Y       |
| PIRLS | 2016 | 150   | FULL    | N       |
| TIMSS | 2003 | 75    | HALF    | Y       |
| TIMSS | 2015 | 150   | FULL    | N       |
| TIMSS | 2023 | 250   | FULL    | N       |

The column names correspond to the arguments used by IDB Analyzer.

`nrwgt`: The number of replicate weights (i.e., the number of replications) used per study. ICILS, ICCS, and until 2015, PIRLS and TIMSS, used 75 replicate weights, i.e., one replication per each jackknife zone. From 2015, in PIRLS and TIMSS, used 150 replicate weights, i.e., two replications per each jackknife zone. Since 2021, PIRLS and TIMSS increased to 125 jackknife zones, meaning that they count with 250 replicate weights.

`jk2type`: one replicate per jackknife zone (`HALF`) or two replicates per jackknife zone (`FULL`). See TIMSS 2023 and ICILS 2023 Technical Reports to see the formula for each one.

`shrtcut`: until TIMSS/PIRLS 2011, the sampling variance (i.e., the jackknife replications) were calculated only for the first plausible value. Currently, the sampling variance is calculated for all plausible values and averaged. In other words, if we have a study with `nrwgt` of 75 and 5 plausible values, with the shortcut it would consist in (75) \* 1 + 5 = 80 replications, while without the shortcut it consists in (75) \* 5 + 5 = 380 replications.

Finally, please note that currently IDB Analyzer by default calculates every TIMSS and PIRLS statistic, including older cycles, with the current formula, i.e., 250 replicate weights. We opted to calculate using the original formulas for older studies.

## File structure

In `/DB` are located the `*.sps` files to merge the files with the variables we use, generated directly by IDB Analyzer. We do not include into this repository the original datasets, as they are property of IEA and freely available in the [IEA.nl repository](https://www.iea.nl/data-tools/repository/). We use the same SPSS files to analyze with SPSS and `ILSAstats`.

In `/arguments` are located the following files:

-   `codebook.Rds`: R list with the arguments used for each analyses. These are generated based in the following files.

-   `matrix_codebook.csv`: sheet with the variables used for each analyses.

-   `matrix_study.csv`: sheet with the arguments per each study and cycle (from which the table above is based on)

-   `matrix_arguments.csv`: minimum arguments per each analyses that are needed by the IDB macros.

In `/script` are located the following files:

-   `01_generatescripts.R`: code to generate the SPSS script to run the IDB Analyzer macros. It also generates the codebook file explained above. Please note that to run these analyses, both IDB Analyzer and SPSS need to be installed.

-   `01b_SPSSsyntax_GitHub.sps`: SPSS syntax to run all the analyses, generated with the file `01`. The file uses absolute paths, so they need to be changed to each PC actual paths. It currently stores a empty t0.spv file that is used to calculate the estimation times later. It runs

-   `02_formatSPSSresults.R`: code to import SPSS results (stored in .csv) to R objects. The results are stored with list file.

-   `03_repR.R`: code to replicate the IDB-SPSS analyses with `ILSAstats` , following the same codebook.

-   `04_compareresults.R`: code to import both R and SPSS results and compare them.

-   `99` files are different utility codes. The most useful is `util_toupper`, to replace all variable names to uppercase (useful for cases as TIMSS 2003, that present lowercase).

In `/outputSPSS` are located the .csv files generated by IDB-SPSS.

In `/outputR` are located the following outputs:

-   `results_spss.Rds`: results from SPSS in R format.

-   `resultsR.Rds`: results from `ILSAstats`

-   `results_compared.Rds`, `res_comp_merged.Rds`, `res_comp_bystatistic.Rds`: comparison of results into different ways of structuring the comparisons.
